h1. acts_as_sdata

Ruby implementation of SData (Sage Data) protocol. Rails plugin which enables SData syndication.

h2. Demo

Let's consider we want to expose the list of US presidents in SData way (this is exactly what is done in "presidents":http://github.com/DanielVartanov/acts_as_sdata-examples/tree/master/presidents/ application in "acts_as_sdata-examples":http://github.com/DanielVartanov/acts_as_sdata-examples repository).

From client side it will look like this:

h3. Instance path

<code>http://localhost:3000/presidents/!Wilson</code>

<pre><?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<entry xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2005/Atom">
  <title>Wilson, Woodrow</title>
  <summary>Wilson, Woodrow (1856-1924)</summary>
</entry></pre>

h3. Collection path

<code>http://localhost:3000/presidents</code>

<pre><?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<feed xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2005/Atom">
  <id>urn:uuid:60a76c80-d399-11d9-b93C-0003939e0af6</id>
  <title>List of US presidents</title>
  <updated>2009-11-17T10:55:28+06:00</updated>
  <link href="http://example.com/presidents"/>
  <author>
    <name>Sage</name>
  </author>
  <entry>
    <title>Washington, George</title>
    <summary>Washington, George (1732-1799)</summary>
  </entry>
  <entry>
    <title>Adams, John</title>
    <summary>Adams, John (1735-1826)</summary>
  </entry>
.....
</pre>

h3. Predicate

<code>http://localhost:3000/presidents(born_at gt 1900)</code>

<pre><?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<feed xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2005/Atom">
  <id>urn:uuid:60a76c80-d399-11d9-b93C-0003939e0af6</id>
  <title>List of US presidents</title>
  <updated>2009-11-17T10:58:15+06:00</updated>
  <link href="http://example.com/presidents"/>
  <author>
    <name>Sage</name>
  </author>
  <entry>
    <title>Kennedy, John</title>
    <summary>Kennedy, John (1917-1963)</summary>
  </entry>
  <entry>
    <title>Johnson, Lyndon</title>
    <summary>Johnson, Lyndon (1908-1973)</summary>
  </entry>
.....
</pre>

h2. How to install

h3. Install Usher

_(Usher is an alternative router)_

It is better to refer to "User's page":http://github.com/joshbuddy/usher/, but usually installation of Usher plugin is just one commad:

<code>$ script/plugin install git://github.com/joshbuddy/usher.git</code>

h3. Install acts_as_sdata

<code>$ script/plugin install git://github.com/DanielVartanov/acts_as_sdata.git</code>

h2. How to use

In order to make application act as SData you should write the following.

h3. In router

<code>map.sdata_resource :presidents</code>
_this line will enable all SData-related paths for /presidents_

Also you should include special routing delimiters which are used in SData paths (remember, we are using Usher, this will _NOT_ work with native Rails Router).

Change
<code>ActionController::Routing::Routes.draw do |map|</code>
to
<code>ActionController::Routing::Routes.draw(:delimiters => ['/', '.', '!', '\(', '\)' ]) do |map|</code>

h3. In controller

<pre>acts_as_sdata :model => President,
              :feed => { :id => 'urn:uuid:60a76c80-d399-11d9-b93C-0003939e0af6',
                          :author => 'Sage',
                          :path => '/presidents',
                          :title => 'List of US presidents' }</pre>
_<code>:feed</code> options defines fields of Atom feed_

h3. In model

<pre>acts_as_sdata :title => lambda { "#{last_name}, #{first_name}" },
              :summary => lambda { "#{last_name}, #{first_name} (#{born_at}-#{died_at})" },
              :instance_id => :last_name</pre>

_Note #1: these lambda's will be executed in context of the actual model instance._

_Note #2: SData specifications say that human-readable instance id's are preferred. The <code>:instance_id</code> option helps to enable search by any unique attribute._

h2. Removing ambiguity

h3. Problem

There is an ambigious path in case of exposing same resource in both REST and SData ways:

<code>/presidents</code>

It might be treated either as #index (REST way) or as #sdata_collection (SData way).

h3. Solution

In order to remove this ambiguity, a :formatted_collection_path option can be given as a second parameter to #sdata_resource in routes.rb:

<code>map.sdata_resource :presidents, :formatted_collection_path => true</code>

Then,
<code>/presidents</code> routes to Presidents#index and returns HTML
<code>/presidents.sdata</code> routes to Presidents#sdata_collection and returns Atom/XML

<i>without any changes in the controller code!</i>

Copyright Sage 2009
Released under the MIT license